So as we saw earlier in the course,
we can add events to elements with
a thing that we call the on directive.
And that's basically equivalent to
doing element.addEventListener in
Vanilla JavaScript.
So in this application here,
we have a mousemove handler,
which is gonna change this value to
the current position of the mouse.
And then we're just displaying
that inside the mark up here.
Now if we now add a mousemove handler
to the div, on:mousemove= and
then just pass it a reference,
To the function,
Then now as we move the mouse around,
the text on the screen will change.
And you'll notice that this function
reference is being called with
the event object that you would get
if you were using addEventListener,
it's exactly the same.
And we can also declare
event handlers inline.
We don't need to pass
a function reference.
We can do it like this instead.
Still works, and now we can get rid of
that handler because we no longer need it.
This can be very convenient at times,
but it's also
something that you can use to make your
templates look like absolute gibberish.
So generally, once your event handlers
get more complicated than this,
you want to hoist them into the script
block and give them a name.
I should point out something here.
If you're using an editor
where this syntax highlighting
causes problems because
it's not typical HTML,
you can wrap the whole thing
in quote marks just so
that you don't have those
syntax highlighting problems.
As far as Svelte's concerned,
those two things are identical.
It's not gonna treat this as a string.
So we can also add modifiers
to our event handlers.
And what modifiers do is they change the
behavior of the event handler in some way.
For example, we can add a once
modifier to this on:click handler.
Right now, if I do Click me,
I'll get an alert.
I do Click me again,
I'll get another alert.
Third time, a third alert.
But sometimes you want
an event to only happen once.
So we'd use the pipe syntax, pipe once.
You pipe the event through
the once modifier, and
now click once, click twice,
click three times, nothing happens.
There's a few different modifiers
that we have access to.
We have preventDefault, which calls
event.preventDefault before handling
the event, which is useful for handling
form submissions client side, for example.
stopPropagation which calls
event.stopPropagation,
which means that the event
doesn't bubble to outer elements.
We can add the passive modifier,
which will improve scrolling
performance on touch and wheel events.
Although Svelte will, if it's safe to,
add that modifier itself.
The capture modifier
causes the event to be
handled on the capture phase as
opposed to the bubble phase.
Basically what that means is
events work their way in from
the window when they first happen.
So if you click on an element,
the window receives the event
during the capture phase.
And then any parent elements get it,
all the way down to the element that
was actually clicked,
which is called the event target.
And then it goes to the bubble phase,
and it works its way back out again.
And by default, Svelte event handlers
will be handled in the bubble phase.
But very occasionally, you will need
to handle them in the capture phase,
and that modifier allows you to do so.
And we also have the self modifier, which
only triggers the handler if the event
target is the element itself,
rather than a child of that element.
So that's what DOM events look like.
But we also have component events,
which are a way that components
can communicate with each other.
So typically, our data will flow
into components as props, but
it can flow back out of components in
cases where it needs to as events.
So here in our app.svelte,
we have an inner component, and
we have an on:message event handler that's
gonna alert the details of that message.
Inside our inner component,
we need to set that up so
that this event gets dispatched.
And the way that we do it is
by importing a function called
createEventDispatcher from Svelte itself.
And once we've done that,
we create a dispatch function.
And then inside our
sayHello function here,
we're gonna call dispatch
with the name of the event,
which in this case is message,
and an optional payload of data.
And now when we click on this button,
the inner component creates the event,
broadcasts it,
and then the outer component
is able to handle it.
And if we log the event here,
Just gonna comment that out.
You'll see that what we're using
is the native DOM custom event,
which, among other things,
has this detail property,
which corresponds to the payload that
we passed to the dispatch function.
Now a question that we get a lot is why
do we need to do this two line stanza
where we import createEventDispatcher,
and then we create a dispatch function?
Wouldn't it be easier if we could
just do important dispatch, and
Svelte will then get rid of that?
So the way that it works is when this
script block is being executed when
a component is created, Svelte knows which
component is currently instantiating.
And so when we call a function
like createEventDispatcher,
we're able to create a function that
is bound to that specific component.
Whereas if we were just importing
a function called dispatch,
which doesn't exist, from Svelte,
then when we called it,
Svelte will have no way of knowing which
component was dispatching the event.
And so it wouldn't know which
handlers needed to be triggered.
So that's why we have this two line
stanza, createEventDispatcher.
And then this needs to run at
the top level of the script block.
In the DOM, when an event is triggered
on an element, it will bubble out
from that element to its parents until
it eventually reaches the window.
That doesn't happen with components.
If you want to listen to an event on some
nested component, then the intermediate
components need to forward the events
that you're interested in.
So now we have a similar case to before.
We have an inner component that
is gonna dispatch an event, but
it's wrapped in an outer component.
And the outer component is what's
inside the main app.svelte.
So what we need to do here is for
the event from inner via
outer up all the way to app.
And one way that we could do that is
by going through the whole rigmarole
of creating the event dispatcher
inside the outer component.
Do the whole const dispatch
= createEventDispatcher, and
then we'll create, A forward handler.
And just forward the event detail from
the inner component up to the app,
on:message=[forward].
And now when we click that button,
the event is forwarded.
But that's an awful lot of boilerplate
to do something fairly straightforward.
So Svelte gives us a slightly
easier way to do this.
If we just have on:message,
just like that,
it will do all that behind the scenes.
It recognizes that that
is you asking the outer
component to forward that message from
the inner component to its parents.
And we can do the same
thing with DOM elements.
So we have a custom button component
here with some fancy styling.
And we want to get click
events handled inside the app.
Right now,
the button doesn't have an event handler.
And again, we could wire up some
logic to forward the event manually.
But it's a lot easier
if we just do on:click.
And so now, any click events from
the button will be forwarded through
the custom button component to anything
that includes the custom button component,
like our app.svelte here.